docs: guide for sliding puzzle example (#772)
NVIDIA-NeMo/RL: docs/guides/grpo-sliding-puzzle.md

5. [Reward System](#reward-system)
6. [Results and Performance](#results-and-performance) 

## Quick Start Guide

#### 1. Installation

Refer to [this guide](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file#prerequisites) for detailed instructions on installation.

#### 2. Training Run

Train a model to solve the sliding puzzle using the default 2×2 configuration and GRPO

```bash
uv run python examples/run_grpo_sliding_puzzle.py 
```

#### 3. Custom Configuration

By default, this uses the configuration in [grpo_sliding_puzzle.yaml](../../examples/configs/grpo_sliding_puzzle.yaml). You can customize parameters with command-line overrides to experiment with different puzzle sizes or levels of difficulty
```bash
# Train on a 3×3 puzzle with 10 random moves to scramble the board
uv run python examples/run_grpo_sliding_puzzle.py \
    env.sliding_puzzle_game.cfg.game_config.size=3 \
    env.sliding_puzzle_game.cfg.game_config.shuffle_moves=10
```

#### 4. Monitor Progress

You can enable logging via Weights & Biases and TensorBoard to monitor training metrics such as rewards, success rate, and loss curves

```bash
# Enable logging (optional)

> python examples/run_grpo_sliding_puzzle.py \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
uv run examples/run_grpo_sliding_puzzle.py \
```

The sliding puzzle consists of:
- **Grid**: An `n×n` grid with numbered tiles and one empty space
- **Tiles**: Numbered from `1` to `n²-1`, placed in random order
- **Empty Space**: Represented by `0`, typically starting at the bottom-right corner
- **Goal State**: Sequential arrangement `1, 2, 3, ..., n²-1` with `0` at bottom-right

### Example Data Sample:
```
===== SLIDING PUZZLE =====
Arrange the 3x3 grid by sliding tiles into the empty space.
- The goal is to arrange numbers from 1 to 8 in order
- Use 'up', 'down', 'left', 'right' to slide in that direction
- Use 'view' to see the current state of the board

Current Board State:

  +---------+
1 | 1     3 |
2 | 4  2  5 |
3 | 7  8  6 |
  +---------+
     1  2  3 

Reach the goal state where numbers are ordered 1 through 8 with the empty space (0) at the bottom right.
Valid actions: 'up', 'down', 'left', 'right', or 'slide row col' (e.g., 'slide 1 2').
After thinking, output your chosen action on a new line starting with '<action></action>' like this:
<action>your_action</action>
If you just want to see the board, output <action>view</action>
Think carefully step-by-step before acting.

```

### Movement Rules

> 1. **Valid Moves**: Only tiles adjacent to the empty space `0` can be moved

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Valid Moves**: Only tiles adjacent to the empty space `0` can be moved.
```

> 2. **Movement Direction**: Tiles slide into the empty space, not the other way around

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **Movement Direction**: Tiles slide into the empty space, not the other way around.
```

> 3. **Grid Boundaries**: Moves that would go beyond the grid are invalid

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. **Grid Boundaries**: Moves that would go beyond the grid are invalid.
```

> 4. **Single Tile Movement**: Each action affects only one tile at a time

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. **Single Tile Movement**: Each action affects only one tile at a time.
```

        shuffle_moves: 4     # Number of random moves to scramble the puzzle
      max_moves: 40          # Maximum number of moves allowed per episode
```
#### Description

- **`size`**: Determines the dimensions of the puzzle board (`n×n`).
- **`shuffle_moves`**: Controls the initial difficulty by randomly moving tiles to scramble the puzzle.
- **`max_moves`**: Sets an upper limit on the number of actions the agent can take in one episode.

Grids are generated with sizes ranging from 2 to game_config.size. Each grid starts with a solved state and is shuffled by moving random tiles to the empty space n times, where n is a random number between 1 and `shuffle_moves`. The grid is shuffled using only valid moves. 
The `generate_puzzle_datum()` function in [run_grpo_sliding_puzzle.py](../../examples/run_grpo_sliding_puzzle.py) is responsible for generating the dataset. [sliding_puzzle.py](../../nemo_rl/environments/games/sliding_puzzle.py) contains the `SlidingPuzzleGameLogic` class, responsible for puzzle generation and initialization logic. The number of shuffle moves and size of the grid will control puzzle difficulty.

#### Generation Algorithm

> The puzzle configuration is randomly generated by sampling the grid size and number of shuffling moves within the defined maximums

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The puzzle configuration is randomly generated by sampling the grid size and number of shuffling moves within the defined maximums:
```

```python
def generate_random_config(max_config: dict[str, Any]) -> dict[str, Any]:
    """Generate a random config for the sliding puzzle game."""
    shuffle_moves = random.randint(1, max_config.get("shuffle_moves"))
    if shuffle_moves % 2 == 0:
        shuffle_moves += 1  # Ensure odd number for proper scrambling
    return {
        "size": random.randint(2, max_config.get("size", 3)),
        "shuffle_moves": shuffle_moves,
    }

      game_config = generate_random_config(game_config)
      initial_game_state = SlidingPuzzleGameLogic.generate(game_config)
      initial_render = SlidingPuzzleGameLogic.render(initial_game_state)
      welcome_message = SlidingPuzzleGameLogic.init(initial_game_state)
  ```

### Dataset Size Calculation

> Dataset size is defined by parameters in grpo_sliding_puzzle.yaml

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dataset size is defined by parameters in grpo_sliding_puzzle.yaml:
```

```
Training Size = num_prompts_per_step × num_generations_per_prompt × max_num_steps
Validation Size = max_val_samples
```

### Data Structure

Each training sample is returned as a `DatumSpec` dictionary with the following structure:

```python
datum: DatumSpec = {
    "message_log": message_log,              # Conversation history
    "length": len(tokenized_prompt),         # Token count
    "extra_env_info": metadata,              # Game state metadata
    "loss_multiplier": 1.0,                  # Training weight
    "idx": idx,                              # Sample index
    "task_name": task_name,                  # Task identifier
    "stop_strings": ["</action>"],           # Termination tokens
}
```

## Environment Interface

<!-- ### Architecture Flow

```
GRPO Training Pipeline:
run_grpo_sliding_puzzle.grpo_train → nemo_rl.experience.rollouts.run_multi_turn_rollouts → generate_response + calculate_reward → environments.games.sliding_puzzle.SlidingPuzzleEnv.step
``` -->

### Core Classes

> [sliding_puzzle.py](../../nemo_rl/environments/games/sliding_puzzle.py) defines the environment, and the logic for interacting with the environment. The core classes used are outlined below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [sliding_puzzle.py](../../nemo_rl/environments/games/sliding_puzzle.py) defines the environment and the logic for interacting with the environment. The core classes used are outlined below:
```

#### SlidingPuzzleEnv

> Main environment class implementing Ray remote actor for distributed processing. This class uses functions from SlidingPuzzleGameLogic and SlidingPuzzleRunner class to interact with the environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The SlidingPuzzleEnv class serves as the main environment, implementing a Ray remote actor for distributed processing and using functions from both the SlidingPuzzleGameLogic and SlidingPuzzleRunner classes to interact with the environment.
```

```python
@ray.remote
class SlidingPuzzleEnv(EnvironmentInterface):
    def __init__(self, cfg: Optional[SlidingPuzzleConfig] = None):
        """Initialize environment with configuration."""
        
    def step(
        self,
        message_log_batch: list[LLMMessageLogType],
        metadata_batch: list[SlidingPuzzleMetadata],
    ) -> EnvironmentReturn:
        """Process batch of interactions."""
```

#### SlidingPuzzleGameLogic

> Core game mechanics with static methods for puzzle operations. Includes reward calculation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The SlidingPuzzleGameLogic class defines the core game mechanics through static methods for puzzle operations and includes functionality for reward calculation.
```

```python
class SlidingPuzzleGameLogic:
    @staticmethod
    def generate(config: dict[str, Any]) -> dict[str, Any]:
        """Generate new puzzle with specified configuration."""
        
    @staticmethod
    def init(game_state: dict[str, Any]) -> str:
        """Create welcome message with game rules."""
        
    @staticmethod
    def step(action: str, game_state: dict[str, Any]) -> tuple[str, float, bool, dict[str, Any]]:
        """Execute action and return (response, reward, terminated, new_state)."""
        
    @staticmethod
    def render(game_state: dict[str, Any]) -> str:
        """Render current puzzle state as visual grid."""
```

#### SlidingPuzzleRunner

> Handles turn processing and action management:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The SlidingPuzzleRunner class handles turn processing and action management. 
```

```python
class SlidingPuzzleRunner:
    def __init__(self):
        """Initialize runner with no persistent state."""
        
    def _parse_action(self, text: str) -> Optional[str]:
        """Extract action from model response using XML tag parsing."""
        
    def process_turn(
        self,
        message_log: LLMMessageLogType,
        metadata: SlidingPuzzleMetadata,
    ) -> tuple[dict[str, str], float, bool, Optional[list[str]], Optional[SlidingPuzzleMetadata]]:
        """Process single turn and return (response_dict, reward, terminated, stop_strings, updated_metadata)."""
```

### Processing Pipeline

The step function creates a processing pipeline where each class handles specific responsibilities:

> 1. **Parse action** (`SlidingPuzzleRunner`): Extracts action from model response using XML tag parsing via `process_turn` method

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Parse action** (`SlidingPuzzleRunner`): Extracts the action from the model response using XML tag parsing via the `process_turn` method.
```

> 2. **Validate Move** (`SlidingPuzzleGameLogic`): Checks if action is valid for current game state and execute the move

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **Validate Move** (`SlidingPuzzleGameLogic`): Checks if the action is valid for the current game state and then executes the move.
```

> 3. **Execute Action** (`SlidingPuzzleGameLogic`): Applies move to game state using `SlidingPuzzleGameLogic.step` method

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. **Execute Action** (`SlidingPuzzleGameLogic`): Applies the move to the game state using the `SlidingPuzzleGameLogic.step` method.
```

> 4. **Calculate Reward** (`SlidingPuzzleGameLogic`): Assigns a reward based on progress toward solving the puzzle (step function)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. **Calculate Reward** (`SlidingPuzzleGameLogic`): Assigns a reward based on progress toward solving the puzzle (step function).
```

> 6. **Return Results** (`SlidingPuzzleEnv`):  Returns the updated interaction state as an `EnvironmentReturn` object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. **Return Results** (`SlidingPuzzleEnv`):  Returns the updated interaction state as an `EnvironmentReturn` object.
```

## Reward System

### Reward Structure

> The environment uses a sparse reward scheme designed to encourage complete solution strategies rather than incremental progress or reward hacking.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The environment uses a sparse reward scheme designed to encourage complete solution strategies, rather than incremental progress or reward hacking.
```

| Condition | Reward | Termination |
|-----------|--------|-------------|
| Valid move (non-solving) | 0.0 | False |
| Invalid move | 0.0 | False |
| Puzzle solved | 1.0 | True |
| Max moves reached | 0.0 | True |
| Invalid action format | 0.0 | False |

>Goal: The agent receives a reward only upon successfully solving the puzzle, promoting long-horizon planning.

### Reward Calculation Logic

```python
def step(action: str, game_state: dict[str, Any]) -> tuple[str, float, bool, dict[str, Any]]:
    """Process action and calculate reward."""
    reward = 0.0
    is_terminated = False
    
    if move_made:
        # Check if puzzle is solved
        if new_state["grid"] == new_state["solution"]:
            reward = 1.0
            is_terminated = True
        else:
            reward = 0.0  # No reward for non-solving moves
    
    return response, reward, is_terminated, new_state
```
## Results

> We fine-tuned [`Qwen/Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct`](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct) on synthetic data for 120 steps with configs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We fine-tuned [`Qwen/Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct`](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct) on synthetic data for 120 steps using the following configuration settings:
```

```
game_config:
    size: 5 # Size of the puzzle (e.g., 2 for 2x2, 3 for 3x3)
    shuffle_moves: 10 # Number of random moves to shuffle the solved state
max_moves: 30
```

> The figure below shows the Training Rewards vs Steps, and validation accuracy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The figure below displays training rewards vs. steps, along with validation accuracy.
```

# Sliding Puzzle using GRPO

This guide explains how to use Nemo-RL to train a model to solve the classic **nxn sliding puzzle** game through multi-turn, reinforcement learning interactions. This environment implements a classic **n×n sliding puzzle** where numbered tiles must be arranged in sequential order by sliding them into an empty space.

The sliding puzzle task serves as a simple yet effective benchmark to illustrate how multi-turn RL and tool-calling are implemented within Nemo-RL. This example provides a minimal setup for understanding the core components of Guided Reward Policy Optimization (GRPO) and sequential decision-making.

## Table of Contents

1. [Quick Start](#quick-startW) 
2. [Game Mechanics](#game-mechanics)
3. [Data Generation](#data-generation)
4. [Environment Interface](#environment-interface)
5. [Reward System](#reward-system)
6. [Results and Performance](#results-and-performance) 

## Quick Start Guide

#### 1. Installation
```bash
# Clone the repository

> git clone https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL.git

Reviewer 3: These instructions are subject to change. Can you point to the frontpage README for this?

Author: Updated instructions for installation
